1 
 
 
PLASPRED – COMPUTATIONAL PREDICTION TOOL FOR IDENTIFYING 
PLASTIC-DEGRADING MICROBES 
 
Submitted by 
AKHIL WILSON 
192003 
MSc. Big Data Analytics 
AIMIT, ST ALOYSIUS COLLEGE (AUTONOMOUS) 
MANGALURU, KARNATAKA 
 
 
 
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Award of the Degree of 
Master of Big Data Analytics 
 
 
Under the guidance of  
 
Dr. Hemalatha N 
Dean, School of IT 
AIMIT, St. Aloysius College, 
Mangaluru-575 022. 
 
Submitted to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ALOYSIUS INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(AIMIT) 
ST ALOYSIUS COLLEGE (AUTONOMOUS) 
MANGALURU, KARNATAKA 
 
 
2021 
  

2  
      ALOYSIUS INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMNT AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  ST ALOYSIUS COLLEGE (AUTONOMOUS) MANGALORE, KARNATAKA  CERTIFICATE This is to certify that the project titled   PLASPRED – COMPUTATIONAL PREDICTION TOOL FOR IDENTIFYING PLASTIC-DEGRADING MICROBES  Submitted by AKHIL WILSON 192003 MSc. Big Data Analytics  AIMIT, ST ALOYSIUS COLLEGE (AUTONOMOUS) MANGALURU, KARNATAKA  In partial fulfillment of the requirements for award of degree of Master of Big Data Analytics of Mangalore University During the year 2021   Dr. Hemalatha N Dean, School of IT PG Dept of Information Technology, AIMIT, St. Aloysius College,  Mangaluru-575 022.  Rev. Dr. Melwyn Pinto SJ  Director,  AIMIT, St. Aloysius College  Mangaluru-575 022.      Dr. Hemalatha N Dean, School of IT PG Dept of Information Technology,  AIMIT, St. Aloysius College,  Mangaluru-575 022. Examiners 1. Mrs. Shubharekha  2. Mrs. Laveena Crasta     

3  
  CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATED WORK  This is to certify that the project report entitled PlasPred – Computational Prediction Tool for Identifying Plastic-Degrading Microbes submitted to Aloysius Institute of Management and Information Technology (AIMIT), St Aloysius College, Mangalore affiliated to Mangalore University in partial fulfilment of the requirement for the award of the degree of MASTER OF BIG DATA ANALYTICS is an original work carried out by Mr. Akhil Wilson Register no. 192003 under my guidance. The matter embodied in this project is authentic and is genuine work done by the student and has not been submitted whether to this University, or to any other University / Institute for the fulfilment of the requirement of any course of study.                                      Signature of the Student:                 Date:31-05-2021                 Akhil Wilson                 II M.Sc. Big Data Analytics                 AIMIT, St. Aloysius College                 Mangaluru-575 022                 Register Number: 192003     Signature of the Guide: Date:31-05-2021 Prof. Dr. Hemalatha N Dean, School of IT PG Depts. of Information Technology,  AIMIT, St. Aloysius College,  Mangaluru-575 022.              

4 
 
 
 
 
 
  PROJECT PROPOSAL REPORT / SYNOPSIS 
 
Project Proposal Report / Synopsis  
for 
 
PLASPRED – COMPUTATIONAL PREDICTION TOOL FOR IDENTIFYING 
PLASTIC-DEGRADING MICROBES 
 
 
AKHIL WILSON 
192003 
MSc. Big Data Analytics 
St. Aloysius Institute of Management and Information Technology (AIMIT) 
Mangalore 
 
 
 
Under the guidance of  
Dr. Hemalatha N 
Dean, School of IT 
AIMIT, St. Aloysius College, 
Mangaluru-575 022. 
 
 
Submitted to 
 
 
 
 
 
ALOYSIUS INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (AIMIT) 
ST ALOYSIUS COLLEGE (AUTONOMOUS) 
MANGALORE, KARNATAKA 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
 
ABSRACT 
Plastic pollution has become one of the most pressing environmental issues, as rapidly increasing 
production of disposable plastic products overwhelms the world’s ability to deal with them. This 
paper predicts the plastic degrading microbes with help of machine learning algorithms. Here we 
used amino acid count in the microbial sequence for the study. Also, used the different properties of 
the microbes including Amino acid ratio, count of the dipeptide, hydrophobicity, hydrophilicity, 
Acidity and basicity. To develop the computational prediction tool, three different applications 
were used namely WEKA, SVMlight and Sci-kit learn. We used all these features and with the help 
of the machine learning classification algorithms such as Random Forest, Support Vector 
Machine(SVM), KNN, Decision Tree(DT) in each of these application tools. For WEKA we 
obtained best accuracy of 100% in j48, IBK, SMO, MLP classifiers, in SVMlight Support vector 
classifier with kernels linear and polynomial obtained an accuracy of 100% and Random forest 
classifier obtained best accuracy of 99.13% in Sci-kit learn. Amino acid count feature gave best 
results in all the application tools.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                   INDEX                                                                                              
1.  Introduction    
 1.1 Overview / Background 7 
 1.2 Problem statement 9 
 1.3 Project Objectives 9 
2.  Literature Review 10 
3.  Materials and Method  
 3.1 Dataset 14 
 3.2 Features 14 
 3.3 Platforms used 15 
 3.4 Performance and evaluation 36 
 3.5 Work flow diagram 38 
4.  Result 39 
 4.1 Weka 39 
 4.2 SVM Light 51 
 4.3 
4.4 
Sklearn 
Streamlit 
54 
78 
5.  Conclusion   
 5.1 Summary 80 
 5.2 Limitations 80 
 5.3 Future scope 80 
7 
 
  References  81 
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1  OVERVIEW 
Society has become completely dependent on plastic, yet we rarely stop and wonder how this 
material might be affecting our health. Toxic additives are often added to plastic in order to 
improve its properties. Many of these additives do not bind to the chemical chain of plastic which 
means they can be released in the environment when exposed to various atmospheric conditions. 
These additives can be absorbed by the skin, evaporate into the air or absorbed via the food or 
drinks we consume. It is important to know exactly what additives are used and take steps to avoid 
them to reduce the harmful effects of plastic on human health as all of them are highly toxic in 
nature. 
Scientists have found micro plastic in 114 marine species and almost one-third of these 
end up on our plates. Some of the chemicals added to plastic to increase its performance are 
considered endocrine disruptors – chemicals that affect normal hormone function – while some 
retardants may Studying the impacts of micro plastics on human health is very challenging. Today 
we know very little about what levels of contamination might negatively affect us. The United 
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization stated – following recent research – that people are 
likely to consume only negligible amounts of micro plastics from fish. Nonetheless, scientists 
remain concerned about the human health impacts of marine plastics. More research needs to be 
carried out before we are truly able to understand the implications of consuming contaminated 
fish. But it’s quite clear that this cannot possibly be a good addition to our diets. With every passing 
day, as we consume more contaminated seafood, plastic pollution affects human health, even if 
these effects have not manifested just yet. 
Plastic is nothing but a polymeric material. The Plastic pollution has become one of 
the most stressing environmental issue, as rapidly increasing production of disposable plastic 
products overwhelms the world’s ability to deal with them. We cannot think a life without 
plastic.  Plastics revolutionized medicine with life-saving devices, made space travel possible, 
lightened cars and jets—saving fuel and pollution—and saved lives with helmets, incubators, 
and equipment for clean drinking water. But in another side it makes a lot of environmental 
pollution So it’s difficult or we can say that practically it is not possible to avoid plastic 
completely from our daily life. The only solution to control the plastic pollution is degrading the 
8 
 
plastic products rather than throwing it into the surroundings. Using the proper management, we 
can reduce the pollutions in the environment that the plastic creates. 
So in this research paper by using the machine learning techniques we introducing the 
microbes which helps to degrade the plastic. We can determine which are the microbes helps to 
degrade the plastic. Here we used the different properties of the microbes include its Amino acid 
sequences, Amino Acid counts, count of the dipeptide, hydrophobicity, hydrophilicity, Acidity 
and basicity. By make use of all these features and with help of the machine learning 
classification algorithms such as Random Forest, Support Vector Machine(SVM), KNN, 
Decision Tree(DT) which is used for prediction in a context of supervised classification. Here we 
used only the binary classifiers to find out the weather the given sequence is positive (able to 
degrade the plastic) or negative (not able to degrade the plastic).It is very important to detect which 
are the amino acids present in the microbes sequence. There are 20 amino acids present in all 
microbial sequence such as alanine(A), Arginine(R), Asparagine(N), Aspartic acid(D), 
Cysteine(C), Glutamine(Q), Glutamic acid(E), Glycine(G), Histidine(H), Isoleucine(I), 
Leucine(L), Lysine(K), Methionine(M), Phenylalanine(F), Proline(P), Serine(S), Threonine(T), 
Tryptophan(W), Tyrosine(Y), Valine(V). 
Biodegradation is defined as the process in which organic substances are broken down 
by living organisms. It is expected to be the major mechanism of loss for most chemicals released 
into the environment. Biodegradation is the ability of microorganism to influ-ence abiotic 
degradation through physical, chemical, or enzymatic action . Microorganisms are involved in the 
degradation and deterioration of both syn-thetic and natural polymers . The polymers are not 
directly utilized by microorganisms where most of the biochemical processes takes place. The 
degradation of plastics is a very slow process. Initially it is initiated by environmental factors, 
which include temperature, pH, and UV. In order to use such materials as a carbon and energy 
source, microorganisms have developed a special strategy. 
Microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi are involved in the degradation of plastics. 
The microorganisms that are responsible for biodegradation differ from each other and have their 
own optimal growth conditions. Biodegradation is generally considered as con-sisting of both 
enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis and nonenzymatic hydrolysis .During degradation, exoenzymes 
from microorganisms break down complex polymers yielding short chains or smaller molecules, 
for example, oligomers, dimers, and monomers, that are smaller enough (water soluble) to pass 
the semi-perme-able outer bacterial membranes and then to be utilized as carbon and energy 
sources. This initial process of polymer breaking down is called depolymerization. The deg-
radative pathways associated with polymer degradation are often determined by the envi-
9 
 
ronmental conditions (Figure 12.4). The complete decomposition of a polymer produces organic 
acids, CO2, CH4, and H2O . The biological degradation of polymeric substances is a complex 
process involving several subsequent steps induced by the action of enzymes. The most important 
type of enzymatic polymer cleavage reaction is hydrolysis. The bonds such as glycosidic, ester, 
and peptide linkages are subjected to hydrolysis through nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl carbon 
atom. Generally, the biological degradation of polymeric substances isinuenced by the presence 
of enzymes and microorganisms, biotic availabil-ity of the polymeric structure and appropriate 
abiotic factors. 
Based on the study that we have done using machine learning in these microbial 
sequence it is found that we can classify the microbes into plastic degrading or plastic non 
degradable based on the count of amino acids present in the microbial sequence.Here in this 
research work we are classifying the microbes into positive(plastic degrading) and negative(plastic 
non degrading).To perform this we have taken 9000 positive sequence of degradable microbes and 
6000 Amino acid sequence of plastic non degrading microbes.we combined the positive and the 
negative sequence and then created a dataframe using the python programing.The whole machine 
learning study starts from this sequence and from these sequence we created 7 features out of this 
or we can say that created 7 different features as 7 dataframes and the preprocess the data and then 
applied classification algorithms. 
 
1.2. PROBLEM STATEMENT 
It is critical to detect plastic degradable microbes from the environment. Conventional technique for 
detecting plastic degradable microbes is time consuming and costly. By analyzing the different 
properties associated with microbial sequence, we are able to predict the plastic degradable 
microbes. Hence it is important to build a model for detecting plastic degradable microbes.  
1.3 PROJECT OBJECTIVES 
 To study the different features of microbes 
 To create different models using different classifiers and different features for each application 
 Comparison of results of different features in order get best feature for each application and each 
classifier 
 List out the best feature and best classifier for each application 
 Model deployment using Streamlit 
 
10 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2 
2. LITERATURE SURVEY 
Due to plastic’s resilience against degradation and its proliferation in industry, the issue of plastic 
pollution has evolved to become a threat to global ecology. Plastic pollution arises from both 
terrestrial and marine sources. The continual stream of pollutant plastic is maintained via two 
means: purposefully, through illegal or inappropriate dumping of domestic and industrial refuse; 
and inadvertently, through poorly contained static and transported waste. Directed by the 
elements,land-based plastic debris migrates to waterways, where it is further added to by the 
disposal or loss borne from marine vessels and offshore petroleum platforms. Such pollution 
results in a number of deleterious repercussions. 
G.lear et al., in their research paper they propose a best-practice workflow for isolating and 
reporting plastic-degrading taxa from diverse environmental microbiomes, which should include 
multiple lines of evidence supporting changes in polymer structure, mass loss, and detection of 
presumed degradation products, along with confirmation of microbial strains and enzymes (and 
their associated genes) responsible for high molecular weight plastic polymer degradation [1]. 
Such approaches are necessary for enzymatic degraders of high molecular weight plastic polymers 
to be differentiated from organisms only capable of degrading the more labile carbon within 
predominantly amorphous plastics, plastic monomers, additives or fillers. they studied on the 
degradable microbes in this work ,they studied about plastic in the environment, disposel method, 
impact of  bacteria in degrading plastic. Plastic accumulation, particularly in the world’s oceans, 
is of increasing environmental concern. One of the major components of plastic waste is 
poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET), a polymer frequently used in many applications, including 
textiles and food packaging. PET is highly resistant to environmental biodegradation and, thus, 
causes many and varied environmental concerns associated with its accumulation, including, but 
not limited to, absorption and concentration of organic pollutants, hazardous effects on marine 
wildlife and dissemination of potentially invasive species to new environments. To date, only three 
plastic disposal methods are routinely used on a large scale: landfill, incineration and recycling. 
Each technique has disadvantages and drawbacks. Landfill and incineration both lead to the release 
of dangerous secondary pollutants into the environment, and landfill also has an additional 
drawback in the requirement of large portions of land space. Recycling addresses the 
environmental concerns of landfill and incineration, however, the process is relatively inefficient 
and the diminishing quality of the polymer yielded is a limiting factor. The process is also less 
11 
 
cost-effective, and subsequently, there is less incentive for investment in recycling facilities. 
Biodegradation is an attractive option for environmentally friendly and efficient disposal of plastic 
waste. To date, no protocol has yet been developed to feasibly dispose of PET by biodegradation 
on a commercial scale; however, substantial research is still being conducted in the field of 
biodegradation of polymers, and given the vast metabolic potential of microorganisms, it is 
expected that it is simply a matter of time before viable biodegradation processes are developed. 
Rajendran Sangeetha et al., concluded that plastics are very useful in our day-to-day life to 
meet our desired needs [2]. Due to its good quality its use is increasing day by day and its 
degradation is becoming a great threat. In the natural environment, different kinds of 
microorganisms play an important role in various steps involved in the degradation of plastics. 
Studying the synergism between those microorganisms will give an insight for future efforts 
toward the biodegradation of these materials. The plastic materials have high-molecular weight 
and have hydrophobic surfaces making them difficult for the microorganisms to form stable 
biofilms and degrade them into small molecular oligomers. The screening of soil microorganisms, 
isolating microorganisms from marine environment and plastic waste dump site could lead to new 
explored strains, with superior performance. Various plastic-degrading methods are available but 
the cheapest, eco-friendly acceptable method is degradation using microbes. The microbe releases 
the extracellular enzymes to degrade the plastic but the detailed characterization of these enzymes 
is still needed to be carried out. Utilization of molecular techniques to detect specific groups of 
microorganisms involved in the degradation process will allow a better understanding of the 
organization of the microbial community involved in the attack of materials. The characterization 
of efficient plastic-degrading microbes at molecular level is still not available, so research should 
be focused in the field of genomics and proteomics, which could speed up the degradation. 
Haben fesseha and Fasil abebe in their paper they said that Plastics are polymers of higher 
molecular mass of synthetic or semi-synthetic organic solids used as inputs for industries [3]. Over 
the last few years, the need for biodegradable plastics has led to extended significance due to the 
extreme use of plastics and increasing pressure being positioned on to be had capacities for plastic 
waste disposal. Lack of degradability and the closing of landfill sites as well as growing water and 
land pollutant problems have caused the situation about plastics. Plastics are causing great 
difficulty in environmental problems and consequently, this desires manufacturers to synthesize 
materials that do not have an impact on the environment. The use of microorganisms in the 
surrounding to metabolize the molecular shape of plastic materials to produce an inert humus-like 
material and this is much less dangerous to the surroundings, furthermore, expertise their 
interaction and the biochemical adjustments they undergo are tremendously essential. In addition, 
12 
 
the use of bio-active compounds coated with swelling materials ensures that once it is far mixed, 
with heat and moisture, they make bigger the plastics molecular structure and permit the bio-lively 
compounds to metabolize and neutralize the plastic. Thus, this overview article is revised to inspire 
and make an impact on the importance of microorganisms on biodegradation plastic substances. 
 Afreen Bakht et al., they said that the plastic pollution is threatening the environment 
because it has very slow degradation rate and high usage in regular activities [4]. The present study 
aims at the isolation of novel microorganisms that would assist faster degradation process of 
polyethylene. The waste samples were collected from diff erent landfi lls and dumpsites. Out of 
forty samples, eight samples were found to degrade polythene strips in liquid medium. Further 
screening of these samples showed that two strains of microbes had high potential for polythene 
degradation. Biochemical tests and ribotyping were performed for characterization of isolated 
bacteria. Resultantly, two novel bacterial strains were identifi ed named; Bacillus 
wudalianchiensis_UMT (2A) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa_UMT (6). Analysis of these microbes 
further revealed that Bacillus wudalianchiensis_UMT and Pseudomonas aeruginosa_UMT have 
capability to degrade 6.6% and 4.8% polyethylene respectively. So, the results disclosed that these 
bacteria have great potential to degrade polythene in less time as compare to natural degradation 
process and can contribute to reduce pollution from our environment. 
 Ziheng Cui et al., they said that the growing amount of plastic solid waste (PSW) is a 
global concern  [5]. Despite increasing efforts to reduce the residual amounts of PSW to be 
disposed of through segregated collection and recycling, a considerable amount of PSW is still 
landfilled and the extent of PSW ocean pollution has become a worldwide issue. Particularly, 
polyethylene (PE) and polystyrene (PS) are considered as notably recalcitrant to biodegradation 
due to the carbon-carbon backbone that is highly resistant to enzymatic degradation via oxidative 
reactions. The present research investigated the catalytic mechanism of P450 monooxygenases by 
quantum mechanics to determine the bio-catalytic degradation of PE or PS. The findings indicated 
that the oxygenase-induced free radical transition caused the carbon-carbon backbone cleavage of 
aliphatic compounds. This work provides a fundamental knowledge of the biodegradation process 
of PE or PS at the atomic level and facilitates predicting the pathway of plastics’ biodegradation 
by microbial enzymes. 
Chan and Allison said that one possible implementation of using bacteria to clean plastic 
waste is through a controllable bioremediation system [6]. One suggested bioremediation system 
in Indonesia involved the use of a whole-cell biocatalyst that can degrade PET component in 
plastic waste. In their devised plastic degradation system, researchers could use synthetic bacteria 
to degrade plastic. Because the plastic products are harmful to bacteria, they could design the 
13 
 
bacteria to use the waste as an energy source instead, and continue growth. Therefore, there would 
be no need to input more material, as the bacteria are self-sustaining, unlike chemical pools or 
furnaces. Plastic is a critical harm to our ecosystem. Production of plastic harms workers, slow 
degradation of plastic in the ocean risk sea animals’ lives, and current methods of recycling plastic 
can be improved to reduce energy costs. Recent discoveries in plastic-degrading bacteria are a hint 
to cleaning up the plastic in the ocean. Bacteria can be self-sustaining on plastic, and can also be 
modified to produce less harmful waste. While modifications in the bacteria can make a better 
system to degrade the plastic, there has to be more active participation 
From this it is understood that detecting a plastic degrading microbe is important nowadays to 
protect our life as well as to save our environment. It is necessary to have knowledge about the 
plastic degrading microbes in order save our mother nature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3 
3. MATERIAL METHODS AND METHODOLOGY 
3.1. DATASET 
The entire dataset is taken from databases such as NCBI and UniprotKB. The dataset is all about 
the plastic degrading microbes. The microbial sequence contains the amino acids. There are 20 
types amino acids present in each of the microbial sequence. The dataset contains 9000 positive 
sequence and 6000 negative sequences. We combined the positive and the negative microbial 
sequence in order to create the prediction model 
Amino acid sequences, Amino Acid counts, count of the dipeptide, hydrophobicity, 
hydrophilicity, Acidity and basicity. 
3.2. FEATURES 
3.2.1. Amino acid count 
 There are hundreds of amino acids found in nature, only about 20 amino acids are needed to make 
all the proteins found in the human body and most other forms of life. They are Alanine(A), 
Arginine(R), Asparagine(N), Aspartic acid(D), Cysteine(C), Glutamine(Q), Glutamic acid(E), 
Glycine(G), Histidine(H), Isoleucine(I), Leucine(L), Lysine(K), Methionine(M), 
Phenylalanine(F), Proline(P), Serine(S), Threonine(T), Tryptophan(W), Tyrosine(Y), Valine(V). 
3.2.2. Dipeptide count 
Two Amino acids linked by a peptide bond become what is called a dipeptide. A chain of 
molecules linked by peptide bonds is called a polypeptide. A protein is made up of one or more 
polypeptide chains. 
3.2.3. Amino acid ratio 
It is the ratio of each amino acids and total number of amino acids in a microbial sequence. 
3.2.4. Acidic 
Acidity is the count of  Aspartic acid(D) and Glutamic acid(E) in the microbial sequence. 
3.2.5. Basicity 
Basicity is the count of  Lysine(K), Histidine(H), Arginine(R) in the microbial sequence.  
15 
 
 
3.2.6. Hydrophobicity 
Hydrophobicity is the count of Alanine(A), Glycine(G), Isoleucine(I), Leucine(L), 
Methionine(M), Phenylalanine(F), Proline(P), Tryptophan(W), Valine(V) in the microbial 
sequence. 
3.2.7. Hydrophilic 
Hydrophilic is the count of Serine(S), Threonine(T), Asparagine(N), Cysteine(C), Tyrosine(Y), 
Glutamine(Q) in the microbial sequences. 
3.3 PLATFORMS USED 
 3.3.1 WEKA  
 3.3.2 SVM LITE 
 3.3.3 SCIKITLEARN(PYTHON) 
 3.3.4 STREAMLIT 
3.3.1 WEKA 
WEKA - an open source software provides tools for data preprocessing, implementation of several 
Machine Learning algorithms, and visualization tools so that you can develop machine learning 
techniques and apply them to real-world data mining problems. What WEKA offers is summarized 
in the following diagram. Weka is a very good platform for the prediction model. Algorithms can 
either be applied directly to a dataset or called from your own Java code. Weka contains tools for 
data pre-processing, classification, regression, clustering, association rules, and visualization. It is 
also well-suited for developing new machine learning schemes. 
3.3.1.1. Pre-processing 
We used python environment to create the weka file directly from the python environment. Using 
python ,The training and testing weka files is loaded and then the classification algorithm is 
applied. 
import arff 
arff.dump('Acid_amino_count_positives.arff' 
      , df1.values 
      , relation='relation name' 
16 
 
      , names=df1.columns) 
3.3.1.2. Algorithms 
 SMO 
 MLP 
 J48 
 IBK 
 SMO 
SMO refers to the specific efficient optimization algorithm used inside the SVM implementation, 
which stands for Sequential Minimal Optimization. The C parameter, called the complexity 
parameter in Weka controls how flexible the process for drawing the line to separate the classes 
can be. he sequential minimal optimization algorithm (SMO) has been shown to be an effective 
method for training support vector machines (SVMs) on classification tasks defined on sparse data 
sets. SMO differs from most SVM algorithms in that it does not require a quadratic programming 
solve 
 MLP  
Trains a multilayer perceptron with one hidden layer using WEKA's Optimization class by 
minimizing the given loss function plus a quadratic penalty with the BFGS method. Note that all 
attributes are standardized, including the target. There are several parameters. The ridge parameter 
is used to determine the penalty on the size of the weights. The number of hidden units can also 
be specified. Note that large numbers produce long training times. Finally, it is possible to use 
conjugate gradient descent rather than BFGS updates, which may be faster for cases with many 
parameters. To improve speed, an approximate version of the logistic function is used as the default 
activation function for the hidden layer, but other activation functions can be specified. In the 
output layer, the sigmoid function is used for classification. If the approximate sigmoid is specified 
for the hidden layers, it is also used for the output layer. For regression, the identity function is 
used activation function in the output layer. Also, if delta values in the backpropagation step are 
within the user-specified tolerance, the gradient is not updated for that particular instance, which 
saves some additional time. Parallel calculation of loss function and gradient is possible when 
multiple CPU cores are present. Data is split into batches and processed in separate threads in this 
case. Note that this only improves runtime for larger datasets. Nominal attributes are processed 
using the unsupervised NominalToBinary filter and missing values are replaced globally using 
ReplaceMissingValues. 
17 
 
 
 IBK 
In Weka this algorithm is called IBk (Instance Based Learner). ... The IBk algorithm uses a 
distance measure to locate k “close” instances in the training data for each test instance and uses 
those selected instances to make a prediction. 
Steps to be followed is 
1. Download Weka and Install. Visit the Weka Download page and locate a version 
of Weka suitable for your computer (Windows, Mac, or Linux). ... 
2. Start Weka 
3. Open the data/iris. arff Dataset. ... 
4. Select and Run an Algorithm. ... 
5. Review Results. 
 J48 
Quinlan's C4.5 algorithm actualizes J48 to create a trimmed C4.5 decision tree. Every aspect of 
the information is to split into minor subsets to base on a decision. J48 look at the standardized 
data gain that really the results the split the information by choosing an attribute. To summarize, 
the attribute extreme standardized data gained is utilized. The minor subsets are returned by the 
algorithm. The split strategies stop if a subset has a place with a similar class in all the instances. 
J48 develops a decision node utilizing the expected estimations of the class. J48 decision tree can 
deal with particular characteristics, lost or missing attribute estimations of the data and varying 
attribute costs. Here accuracy can be expanded by pruning 
Quinlan's C4.5 algorithm actualizes J48 to create a trimmed C4.5 decision tree. Every aspect of 
the information is to split into minor subsets to base on a decision. J48 look at the standardized 
data gain that really the results the split the information by choosing an attribute. To summarize, 
the attribute extreme standardized data gained is utilized. The minor subsets are returned by the 
algorithm. The split strategies stop if a subset has a place with a similar class in all the instances. 
J48 develops a decision node utilizing the expected estimations of the class. J48 decision tree can 
deal with particular characteristics, lost or missing attribute estimations of the data and varying 
attribute costs. Here accuracy can be expanded by pruning  
 Stage 1: The leaf is labeled with a similar class if the instances belong to similar class. 
18 
 
 Stage 2: For each attribute, the potential data will be figured and the gain in the data will be taken 
from the test on the attribute.  
Stage 3: Finally, the best attribute will be chosen depending upon the current selection parameter. 
Limitations of J48 Algorithm  
Despite the fact that J48 one of the well-known algorithms, there are a few shortcomings of this 
algorithm. A few limitations of J48 are discussed below. Empty Branches Constructing tree with 
significant value is one of the important steps for rule generation by J48 algorithm. In our research, 
we have come out with many nodes with zero values or very close to that. But these values don’t 
contribute to create or help to create any class for classification task. Instead, it makes the tree 
wider and still complicating. Insignificant Branches Number of chosen distinct attributes produces 
the same number of potential divisions to build a decision tree. But the fact is, not all of them are 
significant for classification task. These least important branches not only decrease the usability 
of decision trees but also bring on the problem of over fitting.  Over Fitting Over fitting happens 
when algorithm display gets information with exceptional attributes. This causes many 
fragmentations in the process distribution. Statistically unimportant nodes with least examples are 
known as fragmentations. Usually, J48 algorithm builds trees and grows its branches ‘just deep 
enough to perfectly classify the training examples’. This approach performs better with noise free 
data. But most of the time this strategy over fits the training examples with noisy data. At present 
there are two strategies which are widely used to bypass this over fitting in decision tree learning. 
Those are: 
  If tree grows taller, stop it from growing before it reaches the maximum point of accurate 
classification of the training data. 
  Let the tree to over-fit the training data then post-prune tree. Yet, nothing of those is perfect 
solution of this problem.  
3.3.2 SVM LITE 
This machine learning tool is mainly a tool which deals with a system developed using a Support 
vector machine algorithm. The data was trained  using 3 kernels i.e. the linear kernel, the 
polynomial kernel and the Radial basis function Kernel. The results were obtained using the 
kernels by testing the data and the best features was chosen based on the accuracy scores that were 
calculated. 
Kernels used: 
19 
 
 Linear Kernel: Linear Kernel is used when the data is Linearly separable, that is, it can be 
separated using a single Line. It is one of the most common kernels to be used. It is mostly 
used when there are a Large number of Features in a particular Data Set. 
 Polynomial : In the polynomial kernel, we simply calculate the dot product by increasing the 
power of the kernel. 
 Radial Basis function: Gaussian RBF(Radial Basis Function) is another popular Kernel 
method used in SVM models for more. RBF kernel is a function whose value depends on the 
distance from the origin or from some point.  
3.3.3.  SCIKIT LEARN 
3.3.3.1.  Pre-process 
Data preprocessing is a process of preparing the raw data and making it suitable for a machine 
learning model. It is the first and crucial step while creating a machine learning model. When 
creating a machine learning project, it is not always a case that we come across the clean and 
formatted data. And while doing any operation with data, it is mandatory to clean it and put in a 
formatted way. So for this, we use data pre-processing task. 
A real-world data generally contains noises, missing values, and maybe in an unusable format 
which cannot be directly used for machine learning models. Data preprocessing is required tasks 
for cleaning the data and making it suitable for a machine learning model which also increases the 
accuracy and efficiency of a machine learning model. 
It involves below steps: 
o Getting the dataset 
o Importing libraries 
o Importing datasets 
o Finding Missing Data 
o Finding and treating Outliers 
o Splitting dataset into training and test set 
 
 
20 
 
Get the dataset 
Plastic degrading protein sequences belonging to the alkB and CYP153 genes were cumulated 
from databases such as NCBI and UniprotKB. Around nine thousand positive protein sequences 
and six thousand negative sequences were obtained. For training datasets were divided in the ratio 
60:40. To create a machine learning model, the first thing we required is a dataset as a machine 
learning model completely works on data. The collected data for a particular problem in a proper 
format is known as the dataset. This dataset is in the form of amino acid sequences.  
 
Next we found features from these sequences by taking number of amino acids. Those features 
are, 
Importing Libraries 
In order to perform data preprocessing using Python, we need to import some predefined Python 
libraries. These libraries are used to perform some specific jobs. There are three specific libraries 
that we will use for data preprocessing, which are: 
Numpy: Numpy Python library is used for including any type of mathematical operation in the 
code. It is the fundamental package for scientific calculation in Python. It also supports to add 
large, multidimensional arrays and matrices. So, in Python, we can import it as: 
import numpy as np 
Here we have used np, which is a short name for Numpy, and it will be used in the whole program. 
Matplotlib: The second library is matplotlib, which is a Python 2D plotting library, and with this 
library, we need to import a sub-library pyplot. This library is used to plot any type of charts in 
Python for the code. It will be imported as below: 

21 
 
  import matplotlib.pyplot as mpt   
Here we have used mpt as a short name for this library. 
Pandas: The last library is the Pandas library, which is one of the most famous Python libraries 
and used for importing and managing the datasets. It is an open-source data manipulation and 
analysis library.  
Scikit learn:  Scikit-learn (formerly scikits.learn and also known as sklearn) is a free 
software machine learning library for the Python programming language. It features 
various classification, regression and clustering algorithms including support vector 
machines, random forests, gradient boosting, k-means and DBSCAN, and is designed to 
interoperate with the Python numerical and scientific libraries NumPy and SciPy. 
Other libraries are following, 
 
 
Combining Positive and Negative datasets: In this steps we combined positives( plastic 
degradable microbes) and negative (non degradable microbes) sequences. Now we have created 
dataset with 15000 microbial sequences. 

22 
 
 
Handling Missing data: 
The next step of data preprocessing is to handle missing data in the datasets. If our dataset contains 
some missing data, then it may create a huge problem for our machine learning model. Hence it is 
necessary to handle missing values present in the dataset. 
Ways to handle missing data: 
There are mainly two ways to handle missing data, which are: 
By deleting the particular row: The first way is used to commonly deal with null values. In this 
way, we just delete the specific row or column which consists of null values. But this way is not 
so efficient and removing data may lead to loss of information which will not give the accurate 
output. 
By calculating the mean: In this way, we will calculate the mean of that column or row which 
contains any missing value and will put it on the place of missing value.  
Outlier Detection: 
Outliers are extreme values that deviate from other observations on data , they may indicate a 
variability in a measurement, experimental errors or a novelty. In other words, an outlier is an 
observation that diverges from an overall pattern on a sample. 
Types of outliers: Outliers can be of two kinds: univariate and multivariate. Univariate outliers 
can be found when looking at a distribution of values in a single feature space. Multivariate outliers 
can be found in a n-dimensional space (of n-features). Looking at distributions in n-dimensional 
spaces can be very difficult for the human brain, that is why we need to train a model to do it for 
us. 
Outliers can also come in different flavours, depending on the environment: point 
outliers, contextual outliers, or collective outliers. Point outliers are single data points that lay far 
from the rest of the distribution. Contextual outliers can be noise in data, such as punctuation 
symbols when realizing text analysis or background noise signal when doing speech recognition. 
Collective outliers can be subsets of novelties in data such as a signal that may indicate the discovery 
of new phenomena. Machine learning algorithms are sensitive to the range and distribution of 
23 
 
attribute values. Data outliers can spoil and mislead the training process resulting in longer training 
times, less accurate models and ultimately poorer results. 
 
 
 
 
3.3.3.2    Exploratory Data Analysis 
Exploratory Data Analysis is one of the important steps in the data analysis process. Here, the 
focus is on making sense of the data in hand things like formulating the correct questions to ask to 
your dataset, how to manipulate the data sources to get the required answers, and others. This is 
done by taking an elaborate look at trends, patterns, and outliers using a visual method. Exploratory 
Data Analysis is a crucial step before you jump to machine learning or modelling of your data. It 
provides the context needed to develop an appropriate model and interpret the results correctly. 
The purpose of Exploratory Data Analysis is essential to tackle specific tasks such as: 
 Spotting missing and erroneous data; 
 Mapping and understanding the underlying structure of your data; 
 Identifying the most important variables in your dataset; 
 Testing a hypothesis or checking assumptions related to a specific model; 
 Establishing a parsimonious model one that can explain your data using minimum variables ; 
 Estimating parameters and figuring the margins of error. 
 Maximize insight into the database/understand the database structure; 
 Visualize potential relationships direction and magnitude between exposure and outcome 
variables; 
 Detect outliers and anomalies values that are significantly different from the other observations  
 Develop parsimonious models a predictive or explanatory model that performs with as few 
exposure variables as possible or preliminary selection of appropriate models; 
 
Central Tendency And Measure Of Spread  
Here we can find the central tendency like mean, median, mode and measure of spread like range, 
variance etc using describe(). 
 
24 
 
Amino acid count 
 
 
 
Dipeptide count 
 

25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hydrophobicity 
 
 
Hydrophilicity 

26 
 
 
 
Acidity 
 
 
 
 
Basicity 
 

27 
 
 
Amino acid ratio 
 
 
 
 
Tabular Representation  
Code: 
 
Output: 
 
Here 0 represents non- biodegradable microbes and 1 represents bio degradable microbes. There 
are 9000 bio degradable microbes and almost 6000 non- biodegradable microbes present in this 
data. 

28 
 
 
 Skewness 
Amino acid count 
 
 There is not much skewness exist in amino acid count 
 
 
 
 
 
Dipeptide count 
 

29 
 
 There is not much skewness exist in dipeptide count 
 
Hydrophobicity 
 
 There is not much skewness exist in Hydrophobicity 
 
Acidity 
 
 There is not much skewness exist in Acidity 
 
 
 
Hydrophilicity 
 

30 
 
 Not much skewness associated with this data 
Basicity 
 
 There is not much skewness exist in Basicity 
 
Amino acid ratio 
 
 There is no skewness exist in Amino acid ratio 
 
  
Histogram 
A histogram is used to summarize discrete or continuous data and also it provides visual 
interpretation of numerical data by showing the number of data points that fall within a specified 
range of values (called “bins”). It is similar to a vertical bar graph. However, a histogram, unlike 
a vertical bar graph, shows no gaps between the bars. 
Amino acid count 
 

31 
 
 
Hydrophobicity 
 
Hydrophilic 

32 
 
 
Acidity 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
Basicity 
 
 
Amino acid ratio 
 
 

34 
 
 3.3.3.3  ALGORITHMS 
A classification algorithm, in general, is a function that weighs the input features so that the output 
separates one class into positive values and the other into negative values. Classifier training is 
performed to identify the weights (and functions) that provide the most accurate and best 
separation of the two classes of data. Linear discriminant analysis is the most basic classifier that 
identifies the linear weighting of multifactorial data, as a means to maximize the distance between 
the means of the two classes. 
In machine learning and statistics, classification is a supervised learning approach in which the 
computer program learns from the input data and then uses this learning to classify new 
observations. This data set may simply be bi-class (like identifying whether the person is male or 
female or that the mail is spam or non-spam) or it may be multi-class. Some practical examples of 
classification problems are: speech recognition, handwriting recognition, bio metric identification, 
document classification etc. In machine learning, classification is a supervised learning concept 
which basically categorizes a set of data into classes. The most common classification problems 
are – speech recognition, face detection, handwriting recognition, document classification, etc. It 
can be either a binary classification problem or a multi-class problem too. There are a bunch 
of machine learning algorithms for classification in machine learning.  
 
Model 1: DECISION TREE 
 
     Definition 
Decision tree (DT) classifier uses a tree-like graph similar to a flowchart where node denotes a test  
on a  particular attribute  and the  branch denotes an outcome of  the test whereas the class labels 
are represented by the leaves .A Decision Tree (DT) considers all possible tests that can split the 
data and chooses the one that gives highest information gain.  
   Assumptions 
1. In the beginning, the whole training set is considered as the root. 
2. Feature values are preferred to be categorical. If the values are continuous then they are 
   discretized prior to building the model. 
3.Records are distributed recursively on the basis of attribute values. 
 
Algorithm 
1. Begin the tree with the root node, says S, which contains the complete dataset. 
2. Find the best attribute in the dataset using Attribute Selection Measure (ASM). 
3. Divide the S into subsets that contains possible values for the best attributes. 
35 
 
4. Generate the decision tree node, which contains the best attribute. 
5. Excursively make new decision trees using the subsets of the dataset created in step -3. Continue 
this process until a stage is reached where you cannot further classify the nodes and called the final 
node as a leaf node. 
 
Model 2– RANDOM FOREST 
 Definition 
Random Forest (RF) was introduced by  Breiman  in  2001.  RF is  basically  a combination  of  
two  methods:  random  space  method  and bagging  decision  trees.  RF classifier contains multiple 
DTs which are trained according to the bagging method. The final classification result is obtained 
after getting the result of all DTs and voting on the result of  all  DTs.   
Assumptions  
1. No formal distributional assumptions,  
2. Random forests are non-parametric and can thus handle skewed and multi-modal data as well     
as categorical data that are ordinal or non-ordinal. 
Algorithm 
1. First, start with the selection of random samples from a given dataset. 
2. Next, this algorithm will construct a decision tree for every sample. Then it will get the 
prediction result from every decision tree. 
3. In this step, voting will be performed for every predicted result. 
4. At last, select the most voted prediction result as the final prediction result. 
 
Model 3- KNN ALGORITHM 
Definition 
The K-nearest neighbors (KNN) algorithm is a type of supervised machine learning algorithms. 
KNN is extremely easy to implement in its most basic form, and yet performs quite complex 
classification tasks. It is a lazy learning algorithm since it doesn't have a specialized training phase. 
Rather, it uses all of the data for training while classifying a new data point or instance. KNN is a 
non-parametric learning algorithm, which means that it doesn't assume anything about the 
underlying data. This is an extremely useful feature since most of the real world data doesn't really 
follow any theoretical assumption e.g. linear- separability, uniform distribution, etc. 
 
 
36  
Assumptions 1.  More exactly, the data points are in a metric space.  2. The data can be scalars or possibly even multidimensional vectors. Since the points are in feature space, they have a notion of distance – This need not necessarily be Euclidean distance although it is the one commonly used Algorithm   Model 4-SUPPORT VECTOR MACHINE: Definition: Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a supervised machine learning algorithm capable of performing classification, regression and even outlier detection. The linear SVM classifier works by drawing a straight line between two classes. All the data points that fall on one side of the line will be labeled as one class and all the points that fall on the other side will be labeled as the second. The “support vector” in “support vector machine” refers to two position vectors drawn from the origin to the points which dictate the decision boundary. Support Vectors are simply the co-ordinates of individual observation. The SVM classifier is a frontier which best segregates the two classes (hyper-plane/ line). Assumption Of The Model:  The margin should be as large as possible.  The support vectors are the most useful data points because they are the ones most likely to be incorrectly classified.  High stability due to dependency on support vectors and does not get influenced by Outliers.    

37 
 
 
Algorithm: 
In the SVM algorithm, each data item as a point in n-dimensional space (where n is number of 
features) with the value of each feature being the value of a particular coordinate. Then, we perform 
classification by finding the hyper-plane that differentiates the two classes very well. If it’s a 
positive sample, we’re going to insist that the proceeding decision function (the dot product 
of w and the position vector of a given sample plus some constant) returns a value greater than or 
equal to 1. Similarly, if it’s a negative sample, we’re going to insist that the proceeding decision 
function returns a value smaller than or equal to -1. In other words, we won’t consider any samples 
located between the decision boundary and support vectors. 
 
 
3.4 PERFORMANCE AND EVALUATION 
 
3.4.1. Accuracy is the ratio of number of correct predictions to the total number of input samples. 
ACCURACY = NO OF CORRECT PREDICTIONS 
                            TOTAL NO OF PREDICTIONS 
 
3.4.2. Confusion Matrix gives us matrix as output and describes the complete performance of the 
model. 
True Positives: The cases in which we predicted YES and the actual output was also YES.  
True Negatives: The cases in which we predicted NO and the actual output was NO. 
False Positives: The cases in which we predicted YES and the actual output was NO. 
False Negatives: The cases in which we predicted NO and the actual output was YES. 
3.4.3. Area Under Curve (AUC) is one of the most widely used metrics for evaluation. It is used 
for binary classification problem. AUC of a classifier is equal to the probability that the classifier 
will rank a randomly chosen positive example higher than a randomly chosen negative example. 
Before defining AUC, let us understand two basic terms: 
True Positive Rate is defined as TP/ (FN+TP). True Positive Rate corresponds to the proportion of 
positive data points that are correctly considered as positive, with respect to all positive data points.  
38 
 
True Negative Rate is defined as TN / (FP+TN). False Positive Rate corresponds to the proportion 
of negative data points that are correctly considered as negative, with respect to all the negative data 
points.  
False Positive Rate is defined as FP / (FP+TN). False Positive Rate corresponds to the proportion 
of negative data points that are mistakenly considered as positive, with respect to all negative data 
points 
3.4.4. F1 Score is the Harmonic Mean between precision and recall. The range for F1 Score is [0, 
1]. It tells you how precise your classifier is (how many instances it classifies correctly), as well as 
how robust it is (it does not miss a significant number of instances). 
3.4.5. Precision: It is the number of correct positive results divided by the number of positive results 
predicted by the classifier. 
PRECISION =               TRUE POSITIVES 
                            TRUE POSITIVES+FALSE POSITIVES 
3.4.6. Recall: It is the number of correct positive results divided by the number of all relevant 
samples (all samples that should have been identified as positive). 
 
RECALL =                TRUE POSITIVES 
                            TRUE POSITVES + FALSE NEGATIVE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
 
3.5. WORK FLOW 
 
                                          Figure. Work flow diagram 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER 4 
 RESULT 
4.1. Weka 
4.1.1. Preprocessing 
Using python environment we have created .arff file. Then we created train and test files. 
 
Figure 1. Arff file format 
4.1.2. Algorithms 
1)AMINO ACIDS 
 
   Table 1. All results for Amino acid count 

41 
 
MLP 
 
                             Figure 2. ROC curve for MLP 
SMO 
 
                                 Figure 3. ROC curve for SMO 
J48 
 
                   Figure 4. ROC curve for j48 

42 
 
IBK 
 
                        Figure 5. ROC curve for IBK 
Here all the classifiers (SMO,MLP,J48,IBK) with accuracy is 1.so it indicates, it is showing good 
accuracy 
 
2) AMINOACID RATIO 
 
                          Table 2. Results of algorithms 
 
 
 

43 
 
MLP 
 
                        Figure 6. ROC curve for MLP 
SMO  
 
                        Figure 7. ROC curve for SMO 
J48 
 
                        Figure 8. ROC curve for J48 

44 
 
IBK 
 
                        Figure 9. ROC curve for IBK 
 
 For this feature amino acid ratio with j48 and ibk is giving the best accuracy. 
 
3) DIPEPTIDE COUNT 
 
                          Table 3. Results of algorithms 
 
 
 

45 
 
SMO 
 
Figure 10. ROC curve for SMO 
J48 
 
Figure 11. ROC curve for J48 
IBK 
 
                                Figure 12. ROC curve for IBK 
 

46 
 
4) HYDROPHOBICITY 
 
  Table 4. All results for Hydrophobicity 
MLP 
 
                                Figure 13. ROC curve for MLP 
 
SMO 
 
                                Figure 14. ROC curve for SMO 

47 
 
J48 
 
                                Figure 15. ROC curve for J48 
IBK 
 
                                Figure 16. ROC curve for IBK 
5) HYDROPHILIC 
 
   Table 5. All results for Hydrophilicity 

48 
 
MLP 
 
Figure 17. ROC curve for MLP 
SMO 
 
Figure 18. ROC curve for SMO 
J48  
 
Figure 19. ROC curve for J48 
 
 

49 
 
IBK 
 
     Figure 20. ROC curve for IBK 
6) ACIDICITY 
 
   Table 7. All results for Acidity 
MLP 
 
     Figure 21. ROC curve for MLP 

50 
 
 
SMO 
 
     Figure 22. ROC curve for SMO 
J48 
 
     Figure 23. ROC curve for J48 
IBK 
 
     Figure 24. ROC curve for IBK 

51 
 
7) BASICITY 
 
Table 7. All results for Basicity 
MLP 
 
Figure 25. ROC curve for MLP 
SMO 
 
   Figure 26. ROC curve for SMO 

52 
 
J48 
 
   Figure 27. ROC curve for J48 
IBK 
 
   Figure 28. ROC curve for IBK 
 
4.2. SVM light 
4.2.1. Preprocessing 
Using python environment we have created .txt file in the required format for svm lite. Then we 
split the dataset into train and test. 
 
 

53 
 
4.2.2. Kernels 
1) AMINO ACIDS 
 
 
   Table 8. SVM lite results for amino acid count 
2)ACIDITY 
 
   Table 9. SVM lite results for acidity 
3)BASISITY 
 
   Table 10. SVM lite results for basicity 
 

54 
 
 
4)AMINO ACID RATIO 
 
   Table 11. SVM lite results for amino acid ratio 
6)dipeptide count 
 
   Table 12. SVM lite results for Dipeptide count 
 
6)HYDROPHOBIC 
 
   Table 13. SVM lite results for Hydrophobicity 
 

55 
 
7)HYDROPHILIC 
 
   Table 14. SVM lite results for Hydrophilicity 
From all these tables we found that amino acid count is the best feature among all the features. 
Amino acid count is the best feature in order to predict plastic degradable microbes. We reached 
this conclusion from performance of different Kernels (Linear, Polynomial, RBF) 
 
4.3.  SCIKIT LEARN(PYTHON) 
4.3.1. Preprocessing 
 Getting dataset 
 Amino acid count 
 
Output: 
 

56 
 
 Amino acid ratio 
 
Output: 
 
 Dipeptide count 
 
Output: 

57 
 
 
There are 400 columns for this feature  
 Acidity 
 
Output: 
 
 Basicity 
 
Output: 

58 
 
 
 Hydrophilic 
 
Output: 
 
 Hydrophobicity 
 
 

59 
 
Output: 
 
 
 Combining positive and negative 
Amino acid count 
 
 
     
Amino acid ratio 
 

60 
 
 
Dipeptide Count 
 
Acidicity 
 
 
Basicity 
 
 
Hydrophobicity 

61 
 
 
 
Hydrophilicity 
 
 
 Detecting null values 
Amino acid count: 
 
We can see that these is no missing values for Amino acid count 

62 
 
Amino acid ratio: 
 
There is no missing values for Amino acid ratio 
Dipeptide count: 
 
There is no missing values for Dipeptide count 
Acidity: 
 
We can see that there is no missing values for Acidity 

63 
 
Basicity: 
 
There is no missing values for Basicity 
Hydrophobicity: 
 
There is no missing values for Hydrophobicity feature 
Hydrophilicity: 
 
There is no missing values for Hydrophilic feature 
 

64 
 
 Outlier detection  
Amino acid count: 
 
 This is the boxplot to detect the outliers 
 Here we cannot fix the amount of amino acids in a microbial sequence so there is no point of 
treating the outliers here. 
Amino acid ratio: 
 
 There are some outliers 
Dipeptide Count: 
 

65 
 
 It is a box plot to detect the outliers 
 Here the boxplot of 400 features involved 
 There are 400 dipeptide formed from the 20 amino acids 
Acidity: 
 
 This is boxplot to find outliers 
 We can see that, there are some outliers present in this feature 
Basicity: 
 
 There are outliers 
Hydrophobicity: 
 

66 
 
 There are 9 amino acids with hydrophobic property 
 There are outliers in this feature 
Hydrophilicity 
 
 There are 6 amino acids with hydrophilic property 
 There are outliers present in this feature 
 
4.3.2. Algorithms 
Amino acid count: 
 
Decision tree 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

67 
 
Support vector machine: 
 
 
 Knn: 
  
Random forest 
 

68 
 
 
   Table 15. Accuracy table of different algorithms for amino acid in sklearn 
From above table we can identify that Random forest gave best accuracy of 99.13 and the KNN 
classifier gave second highest accuracy. 
 
Dipeptide count 
 
 
Support vector machine: 
 

69 
 
Decision tree: 
 
Knn: 
 
 
 
 
  Table 16. Accuracy table of different algorithms for dipeptide in sklearn 
 
 

70 
 
Above table shows the results of all algorithms for dipeptide feature. All  four algorithms gave less 
accuracy compared to other features. And among these SVM give better accuracy. 
 
Hydrophobic 
Randomforest: 
 
 
Decision tree: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

71 
 
 
Support vector machine: 
 
Knn: 
 
 
                Table 17. Accuracy table of different algorithms for Hydrophobicity in sklearn 
 

72 
 
Random forest gave best accuracy of 98.43 and second highest accuracy is for KNN which gives 
an accuracy of 98.26. Other classifiers also gave good accuracy 
 
Hydrophilicity 
Randomforest 
 
Decision tree 
 
Support vector machine: 
 

73 
 
Knn 
 
 
 
 
                Table 18. Accuracy table of different algorithms for Hydrophilicity in sklearn 
 
Above table shows the accuracy of all algorithms for Hydrophilic property of microbial sequence. 
From this we can identify that Random forest has best accuracy of 93.77 and second highest is 
KNN. 
Acidity 
Random forest 
 

74 
 
Decision tree 
 
Support vector machine: 
 
Knn 
 

75 
 
 
      Table 19. Accuracy table of different algorithms for acidic in sklearn 
All algorithms gave almost same accuracy. But Random forest gives highest accuracy of 89.2 
.Decision tree gives second highest accuracy   
 
Basicity 
Svm: 
 
Knn: 
 

76 
 
Randomforest: 
 
Decision tree 
 
 
  Table 20. Accuracy table of different algorithms for basicity in sklearn 
 
From the above table we can conclude that SVM has low accuracy of 59.9 compared to others and 
Random forest gives best accuracy of 84.86 . 
 

77 
 
 
Amino acid ratio 
Random forest 
 
Decision tree 
 
Support vector machine: 
 

78 
 
KNN: 
 
 
 
 Table 21. Accuracy table of different algorithms for amino acid ratio in sklearn 
Above table shows the results for all algorithms for amino acid feature. From that we can identify 
that KNN gives best accuracy of  99.2 and second highest is Random forest. decision tree gives 
98.3 and Support vector machine gives 97.5. All the algorithms gave good accuracy for this amino 
acid ratio feature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

79 
 
4.4 STREAMLIT 
    
                                Fig 29. Plastic degrading prediction app 
    Fig 30. User inputting Microbial sequence 

80 
 
    Fig 31. Count of amino acid calculated 
                                 Fig 32. Prediction of plastic degrading microbes 
 
Using this Plastic degrading microbe detection app, the user will be able predict the classes of 
the microbes(degrades or non-degrades) by using microbial sequence. 
 
 

81 
 
Chapter 5 
       CONCLUSION  
5.1 SUMMARY 
 From the Weka results we can conclude that amino count is the top features that were accurately 
trained by the machine for both the independent and cross validation test, amongst the 7 features 
that were trained. 
 From the SVM-lite results, for all the 3 kernels it can be concluded that amino acid count is most 
accurate amongst the other   features, which were trained in the same manner. 
 we can conclude that amino count is one of the best features out of the 7 which are precisely 
more accurate when compared to the rest. Most accurate one is amino acid count as it has almost 
the highest accuracy amongst the 4 algorithms applied. 
 Amino acid count giving the best accuracy.so among the 7 features we selected amino acid count 
as the best feature in order to predict the plastic degrading microbes. we use streamlit to implement 
the model. The random forest classifier is used to implement prediction model. 
 Using this Plastic degrading microbe detection app, the user will be able predict the classes of the 
microbes(degrades or non-degrades) by using microbial sequence. 
 
5.2 LIMITATIONS 
We are able to predict the plastic degradable microbes only when the microbial sequence will be 
given to us. For the detection of microbial sequence , we need laboratory facilities.  
 
5.3 FUTURE SCOPE  
This project helps to create the plastic degradable microbes based on the amino acid present in it 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82 
 
REFERENCES      
[1] Lear, G., Kingsbury, J. M., Franchini, S., Gambarini, V., Maday, S. D. M., Wallbank, J. A., & 
Pantos, O. (2021). Plastics and the microbiome: impacts and solutions. Environmental 
Microbiome, 16(1), 1-19. 
[2] Devi, Rajendran Sangeetha, Velu Rajesh Kannan, Krishnan Natarajan, Duraisamy Nivas, 
Kanthaiah Kannan, Sekar Chandru, and Arokiaswamy Robert Antony. "The role of microbes in 
plastic degradation." Environ. Waste Manage 341 (2016). 
[3] Iram, Darakhshanda, Rafia Riaz, and Rana K. Iqbal. "Usage of potential micro-organisms for 
degradation of plastics." Open Journal of Environmental Biology 4, no. 1 (2019): 007-015. 
[4] Bakht, Afreen, Nouman Rasool, and Saima Iftikhar. "Characterization of plastic degrading bacteria 
isolated from landfill sites." (2020). 
[5] Xu, Junyu, Ziheng Cui, Kaili Nie, Hao Cao, Min Jiang, Haijun Xu, Tianwei Tan, and Luo Liu. "A 
quantum mechanism study of the cc bond cleavage to predict the bio-catalytic polyethylene 
degradation." Frontiers in microbiology 10 (2019): 489. 
[6] Chan, Allison. "The Future of Bacteria Cleaning Our Plastic Waste." Berkeley Scientific Journal 21, 
no. 1 (2016). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
